Why Customer Education?

This section will detail “Why Customer Education” and equip you with a background in customer education (CEd), the use cases, the
“enemy,” essential resources, and an elevator pitch.

5

Customer Edu Overview

Customer Education is the discipline of teaching customers how to use and find value in products. As a business function, it benefits
customers in many stages of their journey.
Before a sale, Customer Education educates buyers and influencers about the market and the product. After the sale, Customer Education
educates users about how to use the product. This helps them get the most value over time.
Customer Education isn’t about the specific actions you take to educate the customer; it’s not about running webinars, delivering training, or
writing articles. Yes, it usually involves all of those. But what defines a Customer Education program is its role in your business.

What is Customer Education, and why does it matter for your business?
In the book, Customer Education: Why Smart Companies Profit by Making Customers Smarter, CELab co-host Adam Avramescu defines
Customer Education and what it does for a business.
A Customer Education function strategically accelerates account and user growth by changing behaviors, reducing barriers to value, and
improving the way people work.
This definition doesn’t include which programs are in your portfolio — and that’s intentional. Customer Education departments can use
different programs and strategies to achieve the end goal; no two are exactly alike. We’ll get into some common formats and programs later
in this guide.
Let's break down our definition to learn why Customer Education is important.

Customer Education is a strategic function, not an activity
As we mentioned before, Customer Education is a strategic business function. It’s not just an activity you perform. If you’re delivering
training or writing articles, those are activities, not a Customer Education strategy.
Most startups educate customers organically at first. Everyone pitches in to train customers, write help content or create webinars and
videos. That’s perfectly natural. But there comes a time when Customer Education needs to be formalized.
There are a few reasons to treat Customer Education as a function, not just an activity. First, you won't have one if no one owns your
Customer Education strategy. Everyone will continue pitching in, but their creations won’t be consistent. You’ll start duplicating efforts and
wasting time. Worst of all, your customer won’t have a straightforward journey.
A Customer Education strategy also helps you evolve over time. Eventually, you’ll move toward a portfolio of programs. You may have an
online academy, a help center, a public training or webinar program, in-product education, certifications or badging, and paid learning
services. These programs require rigor. Eventually, they need to be run as an actual department. Start thinking of them as a portfolio.

Customer Education serves both accounts and individual users
Customer Education touches many user personas: buyers, product owners, champions, admins, developers, end users — you name it! We
often educate people who are involved with buying decision. We also educate those who will actually use the product.
Depending on whether your product is B2B (business-to-business) or B2B (business-to-consumer), you may have multiple layers of
education. On the one hand, you’ve got to educate the individual users and help them find value in your product. Whether you’re a B2C or
B2B business, this is true: a product is only as good as people use it. For B2B products, though, you’re often educating those users within
the context of an account. This might mean they’re all going to start using your product simultaneously. It might also mean that they
customize certain aspects of your product for their organization. These types of decisions can change the way you approach educating
customers.

6
Customer Education accelerates growth throughout the customer journey
A thorough Customer Education strategy doesn’t just address what content is created and in what format; it addresses how you’ll drive
customers’ maturity throughout their journey. We must know what they want to achieve and show them the path to get there.
Based on your account and user persona mapping, you will include different types of education along the customer journey.
For example, an account will typically go through a journey that includes pre-sales evaluation, purchase, launch, adoption, growth and
maturity, and expansion. That expansion can lead to further launches, adoption, growth, and maturity. In the best case, it’s a virtuous cycle.
Have you created education programs that only address launch? Or have you thought about what you’ll offer customers to drive growth and
maturity over time?
An individual user also goes through a journey. They’ll start by evaluating the product, too. Once they see how it provides value, they’ll start
learning more basic skills. They’ll build their expertise and more advanced skills if they keep seeing value. They may even become a
champion of your product, influencing others to use it. Do you have education programs for more advanced users and champions or just
your basic users? And does your basic user program actually motivate them to get value from your product? These are big questions to
consider.

Customer Education changes behavior, reduces barriers, and improves the way people work
If you ask the average person in your business what the goal of education is, they would probably say “knowledge.” If they have a training
background, they also might include “skills.”
Customer Education indeed builds skills and knowledge but in the service of what? Customer Education must be dedicated to helping
customers find value. To grow an account, each team member needs the right skills. They need to overcome hurdles to value. And perhaps
most importantly, they should become better at what they do. What could be more valuable than that?
If your Customer Education program is firing on all cylinders, you change how people behave. That might mean giving them the following:
Knowledge that empowers them
Skills that enable them to get value from your product
Motivation to use your product in different ways.
You should be able to measure differences in how people use a product before and after training or with vs. without education.
Focusing on behavior change also helps to determine what is or isn’t essential to teach. “Cool” features that don’t actually provide value to
the customer? Don’t waste time teaching them. Features that are so basic that customers already “just get it”? Again, don’t waste your time.

What should you do instead?
Instead, prioritize educating customers on how to overcome barriers or do better work. Ultimately that’s what most customers are looking for
— more value with less friction. Let’s say you have hundreds of features in your product, but five will let the customer get up and running
most quickly. Don’t waste time taking them on a full tour of the UI — highlight those five features! If you know there’s a common error or
support issue, create docs or in-product education on it! Your work will help the customer avoid or resolve the problem.
Finally, helping customers do better work means that Customer Education is often much broader than just product education. For
companies in new or growing industries (for example, Hubspot for inbound marketing or Gainsight for Customer Success), you’ll often need
to educate your customers on the industry and how to do their jobs well. This provides great opportunities to expand Customer Education’s
reach through industry-focused education.

Why is Customer Education important for a business?
Once companies invest in a true Customer Education strategy, executives often have an “a-ha” moment: Customer Education is a secret
weapon for the business. Often, it’s done in an ad hoc manner, with various people across the business delivering various pieces of

7

training. But when you invest in it, it becomes rocket fuel for your customers’ success.
An effective Customer Education strategy will drive real business results, especially if it serves customers throughout their journey. For
example, Customer Education can influence key metrics from marketing leads, to product adoption, to support contact rate — and more. At
a high level, Customer Education does several things, notably, it:
Provides a roadmap for your customers to get increased value, and over time
Increases your brand value in the market
Reduces support burden and frees up your CSMs and support reps to have higher-value interactions
If done right, Customer Education drives customer lifetime value and maturity, differentiates your brand as a category leader, and increases
self-service efficiency. Here’s a breakdown of how Customer Education drives the metrics that SaaS businesses typically care about.
Higher Customer Lifetime Value
At the highest level, Customer Education affects two of the most important metrics for a subscription business:
CAC (Customer Acquisition Cost): the cost to acquire a customer
LTV (Lifetime Value): the value you receive when they’re successful.
Because customers are expensive to acquire, your business needs to keep them — and keep them growing — to achieve a profit.
According to ProfitWell’s blog, this is why the ratio of Customer Acquisition Cost to Customer Lifetime Value is the “god metric” for SaaS
companies.
Customer Education can support and scale your sales and marketing efforts. But arguably, it’s even better at maximizing your customers’
lifetime value so they stay and grow with you over time.
Defining CAC and LTV
Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC): This is the total cost of your sales and marketing efforts. It includes the humans your company hires, the
tools they purchase, the campaigns they run, and more. This stuff is expensive, so any efficiency will help. Customer Education can reduce
the number of questions your sales humans answer repeatedly. It also helps you convert trials to paid plans effectively. We recommend
providing ungated education on your product and industry. This content creates more informed buyers and provides your sales team with
resources they can use during their deal cycles.
Customer Lifetime Value (LTV): The longer an account stays with you, the more they buy from you over time and the more value you
derive. Customer Education helps to instill customer loyalty by building trust and accelerating value. As you educate customers, they find
new ways to use your product. They’ll know which features to use and how to use them. They’ll learn tips, tricks, and best practices that
give them more value. And these customers are usually more likely to renew or expand and less likely to downgrade or churn. Put simply,
educated customers are more likely to see value in staying with you.
Increased Customer Maturity and Satisfaction
While we’re on the topic of Customer Lifetime Value... Customer Education isn’t just valuable to your business because your customers
stay longer; it’s valuable to your customers because they’ll have the tools they need to succeed.
Customer Maturity: Every business defines maturity differently. Usually, this is a stage of customer growth past basic adoption. It’s where
you see customers starting to use your product in more advanced ways. Mature customers can see the path to ongoing value over time.
Many companies use maturity models to diagnose the customer’s current state and set a path to a future state.
Customer Sentiment or Loyalty: Typically measured with Net Promoter Score (NPS), those 0-10 “Would you recommend this product?”
surveys, customers are more likely to renew and expand over time if they’re strong advocates of your product. Customer Education helps
customers become loyal advocates by empowering them and connecting them with others.
Product Adoption: The path to meaningful product usage is similar to how you would form any habit. It’s like brushing your teeth. Customer
Education helps users understand why they should do it and then build a habit around it. You’ll also be able to drive more sophisticated
usage over time. User sophistication often measures how individual users perform in your product. This differs from Customer Maturity,

8

which usually measures an account's maturity.
Higher brand and marketing impact
As we mentioned earlier, new customers are hard to acquire. That’s why Customer Education can play a role in making it easier. For years,
the conventional wisdom was that you shouldn’t provide too much public education or documentation. Why? Because it would expose too
much to the competition.
Today, companies who invest in public-facing Customer Education find that the benefits outweigh the risks. This holds true both for brand
value and lead generation. Because customers and prospects typically search for information before ever talking to a rep (70% in some
studies!), you want your brand to be the first one to educate them when they search.
Customer Education makes life more efficient for your sales teams. With great education, your company will be perceived as an authority in
your industry.
Brand Differentiation: If you are the “education leader” in your category, your brand will be seen as the expert. This makes buying decisions
easier and also increases customer loyalty. It’s harder to win in your category without proving that you know the space better than anyone
else.
Marketing Qualified Leads (MQLs) and Marketing Attribution: Let’s say you produce educational content available to customers before
buying. This will contribute to the leads your company generates. Today’s buyers often do self-service research before talking to a sales
rep. Where are they looking? Not just in official brochures and marketing content. They want to see help center articles, product videos, and
other resources to educate themselves.

More efficient self-service and support deflection
Customers don’t like calling in to ask for support. On the other hand, your CSMs and support reps probably don’t like answering the same
questions over and over. That’s a lose-lose situation.
Self-service Customer Education not only decreases your support costs but also decreases users’ frustration.
You can measure the average number of support tickets submitted per customer or per 100 customers. This number should be noticeably
lower for educated customers.

Increased revenue
Many Customer Education programs generate revenue directly by selling Education Services. At the very least, larger Education Services
teams run on a P&L. Thus, they’re expected to recover the costs of running their organization.
As you create more valuable educational content, you’ll earn the right to charge for it. Customers will also pay for private or more
customized delivery of your courses.

A Scale Engine for your business
You can achieve nearly any of the metrics above by hiring enough people and throwing them at the problem. A squadron of support reps
can answer all your customers’ questions; a company of CSMs can deliver live training at a customer’s whim; a maelstrom of marketers can
produce a whirlwind of content. But that’s not realistic or efficient for most businesses. It’s often a poor use of those individuals’ skills and
talents.
When you use expensive humans to perform repeatable education tasks, like answering the same support tickets over and over or
delivering the same pieces of training, you won’t be able to scale and serve hundreds or thousands more customers without needing to hire
more expensive humans. This becomes even more true when you serve geographically diverse customers, requiring you to hire more
people in-region.
You’ll develop a strategy with Customer Education that scales with your company’s growth. Common support questions become help
articles and in-product education. Repeatable pieces of training become virtual courses and online academies. Now, you’re providing a

9

more consistent educational experience. And then your talented humans who work with customers can become more strategic. They’ll now
fill in gaps and provide extra help instead of being the single point of success or failure.

Wrapping up...
As you’ve seen, Customer Education can provide many benefits, but you won’t be able to serve all of these functions on day one. Even
mature Customer Education programs don’t prioritize all of these metrics. It’s important for you to start with a Customer Education strategy
that aligns with your overall business and product.
Align with your leaders on which metrics are most important to drive. For example, consider three company stages:
Hypergrowth mode: you may focus more on marketing and product adoption metrics.
Maturing companies: you may be more focused on maturity and scale, as well as retaining customers. Well-established companies:
revenue may be expected, and your department could run on a P&L.
It’s crucial to have a strategy as you build your Customer Education program. Do this before creating a bunch of content or selecting an
LMS.

10

Customer Edu Use Cases

Customer education is typically used by businesses to help customers understand and get the most value from their products or services.
Some common use cases of customer education include:

Customer Onboarding
It's a known fact in SaaS that Customer Lifetime Value (CLTV) is directly correlated to the success of their onboarding process.
As SaaS companies scale up, they must continue to provide a practical and cost-effective onboarding experience. Some of the best
companies, like Hubspot, Salesforce, and Looker, have made digital learning the first step of the onboarding process. These thought
leaders use online courses as prerequisites to the first personalized touchpoint.
HackerRank uses this approach. All new HackerRank customers are provided with an online implementation course that they can complete
on their own time. Upon completing the course, they schedule an appointment with an onboarding manager to go through a more
personalized process.
The benefit to their customers is they can learn about the HackerRank platform on their time and start thinking about how they want to get
the most from their upcoming personalized experience. The benefit to HackerRank is their onboarding resources' time is better spent
because they're now working with more educated customers.
The CCO or other customer success and implementation leaders drive this use case. ROI is usually measured by TTV (time-to-value or the
time it takes for a customer to experience the benefits of a solution), the reduction in hours CSMs/implementation teams spend delivering
how-to-style platform orientations to customers, and increased NPS (net promoter scores) for customers in onboarding or those that just
completed onboarding. In 2023, although the other business outcomes are interesting, reducing customer-facing teams' time spent
delivering training will be vital to articulating ROI to CFOs and other executive sponsors.

Feature Education
Like the imperative of a customer having a great onboarding experience, ongoing product training is critical for ensuring continuous
customer success and influencing customer retention. Digital learning experiences are an effective and scalable way to provide training on
new product launches and prompt the adoption of underutilized features. The goal is to help customers understand the full range of features
and benefits, and to encourage them to use the product to its full potential.
Companies can get creative with their application of this use case. For example, as new products are deployed, customers can be
prompted to register for an online course about maximizing the product's value. Additionally, if a customer upgrades to a higher-tier plan, a
workflow could be triggered to present that customer with an overview course of the new features they've just unlocked. Lastly, if a
customer is misusing the product or is "stuck," they could be enrolled in a course that will help them be more successful.
Similarly to customer onboarding, the CCO or other customer success and implementation leaders drive this use case. ROI is usually
measured by increased product usage (customers that know how to use a product are more likely to be successful with it), reduction in
inbound support tickets and support costs (when customers are served with just-in-time learning content, they are less likely to contact
support or other customer-facing team members), and higher NPS scores. In the long run, when customers know how to use a product,
they'll experience more benefits from it, and companies should also see an uplift in expansion and retention metrics.
Did you know trained customers are 10-20% more likely to renew? Also, the lack of product training is the #1 reason SaaS companies
experience churn.

Best Practices
Sharing tips and techniques for using the product or service effectively and efficiently is the goal of best practices education. This type of
education could involve tutorials, videos, or live demonstrations that show customers how to optimize their use of the product, as well as

11

tips and tricks for getting the most value from it. The goal is to help customers get the most out of the product and to reduce the likelihood of
them encountering problems or challenges.

Troubleshooting
Providing guidance on addressing common problems or issues that customers may encounter is the goal of troubleshooting education. By
embedding courses in a platform, customers can figure out common problems on their own, without involving the support of CS and
Support teams. The goal is to help customers resolve problems quickly and efficiently, and to reduce the amount of time they spend dealing
with issues.

Product Updates
Keeping customers informed about new features or enhancements to the product or service, and how they can take advantage of them, is
the goal of product update education. This type of education could involve regular course updates in the course catalog or in-app
notifications highlighting the latest updates and what they mean for customers. The goal is to keep customers informed and engaged, and
to encourage them to continue using the product as it evolves.

Thought Leadership
By providing educational resources in public customer-facing academies, SaaS companies can increase brand awareness and attract new
customers.
Think Hubspot Academy. It's a centerpiece of Hubspot's demand generation engine. Tens of thousands of people looking to learn about
marketing go to Hubspot Academy before they know that Hubspot even makes software.
What is Hubspot Academy? It's content marketing at its finest!
Using digital learning as a form of content marketing is remarkably powerful and can boost a company's ability to attract and convert new
customers. The internet is flooded with blogs, ebooks, and podcasts. Online courses are an effective way for a company to differentiate.
Crayon, the leading competitive intelligence platform, uses Northpass to build awareness and become a trusted brand for the competitive
intelligence industry. They are using an academy to educate their prospective customers on their category so customers can have a better
understanding of how it benefits them. Crayon has attributed a meaningful amount of its lead generation growth to the visibility of its
academy.
The Chief Marketing Officer or other marketing leaders typically drive this use case. ROI is usually measured by measure by the number of
MQLs (marketing qualified leads or the # of leads that book a sales call) created and, in the long run, CAC (Customer Acquisition cost or the
amount of money it costs to sign up a new customer).

12
The "Enemy" in Customer Education

Most companies are doing some form of customer education, but very few are doing digital customer education.
The reality is customers can stand up a customer education program without using a digital customer learning solution like Northpass. They
can rely on customer-facing teams, disparate content sources (Youtube, support docs, etc.), or "hacky" CSP/CRM automation to deliver
customer education. At Northpass we call these “traditional” forms of customer education. 1:1 Zoom calls with a CSM that are hard to
schedule and take up time, webinars that are impersonal and ineffective, PDFs and article links that get sent and lost in email – these are
all ad-hoc and manual training methods that are inefficient and don’t provide the best customer experience.
Traditional customer education is who Northpass sees as the “enemy” – the alternative way CS teams are training their customers today.
You'll typically see companies having their CSMs set up numerous product orientation/training calls with various project stakeholders,
sending automated emails directing new customers to their Youtube channel or "Set up Guides" in PDF formats, or companies responding
reactively to their customers with "training content" available in their support center.
When you face this scenario, consider the following talk track:
“As a customer success leader, you're probably providing training to your customers in some capacity today. Perhaps it's ad-hoc
mainly, delivered by CSMs or implementation managers, PDF-based, conducted reactively, and largely informal.
In reality, training in this capacity directly contrasts with how people today want to learn.
Today, with a device and connection, anyone worldwide can learn any topic
- Dreamed of playing piano classics? There are dozens of apps to learn the basics.
- Want to cook a meal to impress? Thousands of YouTube videos teach celebrity chef secrets.
- Need to become an effective negotiator? A MasterClass awaits.
But businesses haven't kept pace with how people want to learn.
Instead, they make it hard to learn about their products and burn valuable time with antiquated formats and expensive training
processes that have limited reach to all pertinent stakeholders.
Since 2/3 of the SaaS market hasn't made the first step and started investing in Digitial Customer Education, you have a massive
opportunity to train their customers in formats they've become accustomed to in their everyday lives and have a leg up on your
competition.
We're seeing plenty of companies invest in digital customer education platforms, like Northpass, to educate their customers about
their products and services in a digital format.
Imagine if your customers could access high-quality, interactive training anywhere and anytime that helps them be successful with
your software independently of guidance from your team. Imagine how much operational expenses could be reduced by offloading
routine but essential training tasks from people to platforms. What impact could digitizing customer education have on your
business?

13
Digital Customer Education Elevator Pitch

Digital customer education is the lynchpin to running an effective customer success program. The best companies today want to use data
within their customer success platform or other business tools to help maximize their customer success managers’ time spent on retention

and expansion-based activities. However, what I repeatedly see in the market is that when customers have inadequate, manual, and non-
digital customer education programs, a couple of things happen:

1. Customers continually request more time from their CSM to fill in knowledge gaps about how to use their product, which blocks a CSM
from working strategically with their book of business.
2. Customers don’t ask for guidance and quietly suffer until they can no longer afford to spend money and time on a solution that isn’t
yielding results. Then, they cancel.
Neither of these is a good outcome for the customer or the business. The best companies today, such as HackerRank, Pipedrive, and G2,
are building new programs to enable their customers in a way that’s not fully dependent upon their CSMs. They are delivering:
New user training & certification
Personalized course recommendations to users based on product usage data or health scores
And contextual learning opportunities to users in-app, which is a really good way to reduce friction in customer relationships
As companies are enabling their customers with relevant, just-in-time training, they are also equipping CSMs with this data in their CSP,
CRM, or system of record so they can continue to make decisions on the health of an account.
To summarize, digital customer education programs can fuel and help scale customer success programs by unblocking CSMs and enabling
training to reach more stakeholders, contributing to lower churn.